# On Spirituality, Summer Grass, and Slacklines

*I turn my gaze above toward the naked branches and widen my attention to capture the budding buds, the snailing clouds, the pink and the orange and the deep ocean blue, the every day unnoticed. There's the cold grass against the weight of my body. There*’*s my slackline reverberating in the wind. There's the slow crawl of time and the sky, and Spring nagging at my senses. The sun is retreating behind the Adirondacks again, coloring and erasing, giving and taking everything with it, while the moon rises in stoic resolve. I sit and exist, no longer the center of it all. All that remains is a continuum of sensations and awareness, ebbing with the tide of experience.*

---

A few days ago I had just finished slacklining and was sprawled out on the grass beneath three trees. I was physically exhausted but my mind remained active and was consumed by a deluge of thoughts regarding the future. The mental chatter quieted as I looked across the lake to the mountains beyond, then to the blue

*Spirituality* is a term that tends to draw pitchforks from both atheists and the religious. It’s wishy-washy and non-committal, a shotgun spray of a concept that means something different depending on who you ask. At its heart though is a commitment to the richness and mystery of life. It doesn’t demand religion, nor does it exclude anyone with a God (though I would argue that both detract from what we *actually* care about, which isn't what happens in heaven or any afterlife; what we care about is *this* life and everything within it).

I’ll widen my attention by looking at one piece of sky, then slowly widen and “put myself” put into that space...Had a weirdly transcendent moment at the park. Slipping into and out of the clouds. Space of awareness, like stepping into an ocean, and then becoming a part of it. It’s like waking up from a hazy dream, and merging into an open sense of everything. The boundary between you and the world dissipates. Your bodily sensations turn into pulses of energy that are a part of the scene, not you. Your sense of you slips, if only briefly. It’s the opposite of spacing out, disassociating, of mental clutter and distraction. You wake up to reality, to a lack of concepts, to clarity, to just this. The clouds clear from the sky of your awareness. In that instance What matters doesn’t matter anymore because you break free from the matrix . It’s not quite flow because flow requires challenge and focus, but the feeling is similar.  Sometimes it seems akin to witnessing the birth of a child . I just sometimes wish I can shake the world and point and show them what I see and feel in these moments. Post psychedelic trips feel like this in the afterglow. But there’s no need to perturb the mind so dramatically (although I would highly recommend you do it once - safely! - before you die).  Even brief glimmers in this state can be profoundly positive. On my walks home there is always the curve of a smile and a blanket of lightness lifting me up. I feel like a feather. This is partially why I’m in support of psychedelics. It’s becoming clear what my values are and what more of I’d like to see in the world: a sense of openness and peace . It’s why I meditate, and why I advocate so highly for mindfulness.

The other day I had finished slacklining and was packing the rope. It was sunset hour. Thoughts of the future and my directionless compass were clouding my mind. I

