---
title: 2021-W34
creation date: 2021-08-17 19:26
---

# Consumed
- [The Power of Ritual](notes/books/power-of-ritual.md)
- [Already Free](notes/books/Already-Free.md)
- From [Aeon: The Benefits of Bifurcation, a comment by Jan Sand.](https://aeon.co/essays/dont-quit-your-day-job-the-benefits-of-being-a-bifurcator?comments=true)
- > Ever since I was a kid I have wondered what the search for meaning in life could be. It’s important to distinguish whose meaning is involved. I have lived a long time and finally concluded that the importance of personal meaning is greater than the acceptance of meaning of anybody else or that of society in general. No doubt financial and professional excellence contributes to the total conclusions but we each have been granted a limited period to be alive and, at end, to consider that one’s own satisfactions are inferior to outside judgment strikes me to me a major error. Many major reputations do not stand up to the judgments of history and standards change rapidly even after a few years. No life is lived without major mistakes and many are filled with rather terrible experiences. My early morning contemplations are filled with thoughts of what I should have done and large questions as to why I didn’t. We each fill the basket of our past with the oddest events and reactions and, of course, luck plays a very large part in each of our lives. Some of my most precious memories are a glance at a wonderful sky or a moment of terrible loss over the death of a child or someone else I have loved and still value over many of the people I have known. These very personal things are more important to me than what might seem of value to someone else. Life itself is what I find most precious because the time before I was born and the eternity after I die contributes nothing in comparison to a moment in summer full of warm breezes and the sounds of birds and the way a tree can bow to the wind.
# Reflections