---
title: A Life of One's Own
tags: [happiness, introspection, diary, attention, writing]
author: Joanna Field
---

# Synopsis

'Joanna Field' was born and educated in England. At the age of 11 she wanted to be a naturalist or a painter. At 18 her interest turned from wild nature to human nature, and she began to train for work with very young children; but feeling the need for deeper study she went on to take a degree in psychology and physiology at London University. After this she worked as an investigator in industrial psychology and then held a Rockefeller fellowship in the U.S. for two years. After writing _A Life of One's Own_ in 1932 she spent five years applying the methods of research learnt in industry to human problems in schools. She published an account of this work under her own name in 1938, and a second Joanna Field book, _An Experiment in Leisure_, in 1937. Then again finding the need for a deeper understanding, she undertook the training required by the British Psychoanalytic Society and became a practising psychoanalyst, working with both children and adults, and published the third Joanna Field book, _On Not Being Able to Paint_, in 1950

# The Coming and Going of Delight
"Just as in my diary I had tried to record each day's best moments, so I now set out to observe these moments more carefully, to find out what might be their cause. The first thing I noticed was that in **certain moods** the very simplest things, even the glint of electric light on the water in my bath, gave me the most intense delight, while in others I seemed to be blind, unresponding and shut off, so that music I had loved, a spring day or the company of my friends, gave me no contentment. I therefore decided to try to find what these moods depended upon. Could I control them myself?"

Is this a matter of attention, or the lack of?

"It did seem to me sometimes that they had been influenced by a deliberate act of mine. **Particularly I was struck by the effect of writing things down. It was as if I were trying to catch something and the written word provided a net which for a moment entangled a shadowy form which was other than the meaning of the words. Sometimes it seemed that the act of writing was fuel on glowing embers, making flames leap up and throw light on the surrounding gloom, giving me fitful gleams of what was before unguessed at.**"

"**Not only did I find that trying to describe my experiences enhanced the quality of it, but also this effort to describe had made me more observant of the small movements of the mind. So now I began to discover that there were a multitude of ways of perceiving, ways that were controllable by what I can only describe as an internal gesture of the mind. It was as if one's self-awareness had a central point of intensest being, the very core of one's I-ness. And this core of being could, I now discovered, be moved about at will; but to explain just how it is done to someone who has never felt it for himself is like trying to explain how to move one's ears.**"

It is like trying to describe the non-duality of the mind glimpsed through meditation.

"Usually this centre of awareness seemed to be somewhere in my head. But gradually I found that I could if I chose push it out into different parts of my body or even outside myself altogether."

On attention and [notes/psychology/Happiness](notes/psychology/Happiness.md): "In trying to observe what had happened (idly watching gulls to a 'deep-breathing peace and delight, where her whole attention was gripped by the pattern and rhythm of their flight, their slow sailing which had become a quiet dance.') I had the idea that my awareness had somehow widened, that I was feeling what I saw as well as thinking what I saw. But I did not know how to make myself feel as well as think, and it was not till three months later that it occurred to me to apply to looking the trick I had discovered in listening. This happened when I had been thinking of how much I longed to learn the way to get outside my own skin in the daily affairs of life, and feel how other people felt; but I did not know how to begin. ^^I then remembered my trick with music and began to try 'putting myself out' into one of the chairs in the room (I was alone so thought a chair would do to begin with). At once the chair seemed to take on a new reality, I 'felt' its proportions and could say at once whether i liked its shape. This then, I thought, might be the secret of looking, and could be applied to knowing what one liked. My ordinary way of looking at things seemed to be from my head, as if it were a tower in which I kept myself shut up, only looking out of the windows to watch what was going on.^^ now I seemed to be discovering that i could if I liked go down outside, go down and make myself part of what was happening, and only so could I experience certain things which could not be seen from the detached height of the tower...."

Attention as a tool for creating joy. While dully knitting, Joanna decided to try an experiment in which she shifted her awareness into the full feeling of her body, and with that came a certain ease and adeptness that made the knitting much more enjoyable.

"Although I felt that this discovery was very important to me, I did not seem able to make use of it in the way I had hoped. Although I knew what to do I hardly ever remembered to do it, like the heroes in fairy tales who used to exasperate me by forgetting to use the charm they had been expressly given. **But when I did remember to do it, I was reminded of that little one-celled animal which can spread part of its own essence to flow round and envelop within itself whatever it wants for food. This spreading of some vital essence of myself was a new gesture, more diffuse than the placing of awareness beyond myself which I had tried with music; it was more like a spreading of invisible sentient feelers, as a sea anemone spreads wide its feathery fingers. Also I saw now that my usual attitude to the world was a contracted one, like the sea anemone when disturbed by a rough touch, like an amoeba shut within protective walls of its own making. I was yet to learn that state of confidence in which my feelers would always be spread whenever I wanted to perceive.**"

"If just looking could be so satisfying, why was I always striving to have things or to get things done? Certainly I had never suspected that the key to my private reality might lie in so apparently simple a skill as the ability to let the senses roam unfettered by purposes. I began to wonder whether eyes and ears might not have a wisdom of their own.

# Searching for a Purpose
She had tried to fit a purpose to her life in order to feel more in-tune with her daily affairs, but that simply did not work.

"Gradually a conclusion began to emerge. Instead of, as always before, assuming that they [self-help, mental-training experts] were right and therefore my inability to reach the promised results must be due to my own weakness, I began to ask whether this really was the way to find what I wanted. I had been continually exhorted to define my purpose in life, but I was now beginning to doubt whether life might not be too complex a thing to be kept within the bounds of a single formulated purpose, whether it would not burst its way out, or if the [purpose](notes/ideas/purpose.md) were too strong, perhaps grow distorted like an oak whose trunk had been encircled with an iron band. I began to guess that my self's need was for equilibrium, for sun, but not too much, for rain, but not always. I felt that it was as easily surfeited with one kind of experience as the body with one kind of food, and that it had a wisdom of its own, if only I could learn to interpret it. ^^So I began to have an idea of my life, __not as the slow shaping of achievement to fit my preconceived purposes, but as the gradual discovery and growth of a purpose which I did not know__.^^ I wrote: 'It will mean walking in a fog for a bit, but it's the only way which is not a presumption, forcing the self into a theory.'

Even when she had achieved the life she wanted, there was still the incessant drive for a purpose-driven existence.

"It took me a long time to realize the meaning of this discovery. Although I had kept a fairly regular diary for six months, had made records of my moments of delight, had made excursions into the hinterlands of my own mind, still I did not understand what was the crux of the problem. ^^I had even achieved several of the things I had wanted in external life; for I was married, had reached America, and had opportunity of doing the kind of work I had hoped for. Yet my thoughts were still hovering round this problem of purposes.^^ For in New York I wrote: I want to change my attitudes; it fills me with restlessness that I am always striving after something and I don't know what it is. I envy people, artists chiefly. I want to achieve the play attitude. By this I mean concentration in an activity (flow) which has no apparent use just for the delight of doing it. Why do I want this? I don't know quite, it just seems very desirable. Perhaps it gives freedom from this endless pursuit of one's soul's salvation... 'he that would save his soul'... I want to lose it... Play means to me freedom – freedom from fears. It is an expression of the dignity of the soul, enslaved in no bondage of justification. Perhaps then if I am to learn to play I must go down to hell and find what taskmaster is lurking there."

"I was always full of purposes, always driving myself to do more things - to read more books, to learn more languages, to see more people, not to miss anything. Always I must 'get on', even amusing myself in the ordinary ways, going to night clubs, dances, was 'getting on' – 'getting on' in knowing about the ways of the world, a miser-like grabbing and piling up of experience."

"I did not know that I could only get the most out of life by giving myself up to it... It seemed then that my purpose in life was to get the most out of life. And because I was not capable of more than very muddled thinking, I still assumed that the way to this was to strive to do more and more things; and this, in spite of my intuition about the need for surrender. Here then was a deadlock. I wanted to get the most out of life, but the more I tried to grasp, the more I felt that I was ever outside, missing things. At that time I could not understand at all that my real purpose might be to learn to have no purposes."

"Then, although I still could not say what my main purpose was (after listing out subordinate ones in her diary), a certain sense of direction began to emerge. While drifting with the crowd in the past years I had been trying to get the most out of life in quantity; it was the number of different experiences I had had which pleased me, whether I had lain by the shores of the Mediterranean, or danced in  a Harlem night club, or watched the Yale-Harvard 'ball game'. When friends came and told me of things they had seen and I had not, I was downcast and felt a failure. But consideration of my store of delights was leading me to a different aim. I began to want intensity, not extensity, to look for quality, not quantity, in living. And to find this I had to learn to distinguish good quality from bad quality."

Concentration and looking as a way of remedying the dullness of the daily and revitalizing the familiar: 

> "Now concentration began to possess a quite new meaning. The word had always in the past been connected with the dull and burdensome, it was like having a purpose in life, it meant missing things, shutting out the unexpected; just as being 'good' at school meant turning from the lovely things, whipping oneself away from lazy moments in the sun and from chances of escaping the classroom into glorious loneliness. But now, concentration, instead of being a matter of time-tables and rules, was a magician's wand. By a simple self-chosen act of keeping my thoughts on one thing instead of dozens, I had found a window opening out across a new country of wide horizons and unexplored delights."

On letting go of externally-driven purposes to reveal, perhaps, what we might actually want:

> I had certainly found that I was continually whipping my will to effort after endless goals, goals which might be actually shutting me away from what I really wanted. Why I felt such a desperate urge to reach these things I could not tell, but I had at least begun to guess that my greatest need might be to let go and be free from the drive after achievement - if only I dared. I had also guessed that perhaps when I and let these go, then I might be free to become aware of some other purpose that was more fundamental, not self-imposed private ambitions but some thing which grew out of the essence of one's own nature.
> 
> People said: 'Oh, be yourself at all costs'. But I had found that it was not so easy to know just what one's self was. It was far easier to want what other people seemed to want and then imagine that the choice was one's own.