Yesterday I snapped at my puppy. He was having a wild case of the [zoomies](https://email.mg1.substack.com/c/eJwlkM2OhSAMhZ_mstOgqOCCxWzmNQjQqmQUDD_XOE8_ODdp2jQ9zWk_qzOuId7yDCmTJ6l8nyg9XmnHnDGSkjAqB3LkTPBREJCU95Yb4pJaIuKh3S7JWczurM4u-Efcs6HjZJMCltEyroeFzrOhU28NMEAzstkKaoePpS7g0FuUwe-3OrUDssst5zO92Ner_65xXVcbwxtja8NRe7OHtZa8YZNjyVujTSi5gbA2vyEcDlOdEid72neU07mbGKOs7Vpql9GYifLBUL5MdoKZ9QPvYBYclgVeAz3Wrk3FpKztz2NHojw3t7uz9Wu50VdJeR8tQnneVlVxFO_yrdBrsyPIehGS_GH6z0et6DFW1qB0lt3Uj2IQTAjO5w-BioyJcaSdEKRaQ6hbXuq3_gMqaYvt) in the backyard and trying to rip my favorite sweatshirt apart with his teeth. He’d already left a nice bite mark on my wrist and it was raining hard, which doubly irritated me since I hate the rain. I raised my voice and when that didn’t work (why would it work??) I carried him inside. Once he was calm five minutes later I felt completely ridiculous. Why would I get upset at an animal who 1) is adorable, 2) loves me and 3) is still learning how to orient himself in the world? If I pride myself on staying cool and controlled, how could I react to such a little thing?

Then I realized that I mess up all the time. I forget to check in on friends I care about. I’m impatient with S when I know he’s trying his best (S, reading this: you make me sound like a small child). I procrastinate on projects I’m genuinely excited to complete. I skip days at the gym—I have a whole accountability group dedicated to not skipping days at the gym, but sometimes I still skip. I mess up in big ways, too: sometimes I don’t communicate well enough in important relationships, and leave people feeling unloved. I don’t check in enough with my younger brother, even though he’s starting college this year and I know he needs my support. I don’t spend enough time with my parents. Emotional roadbumps are no exception: I get flareups of anxiety over triggers I’ve already worked through. I’ve done so much work on attachment issues, but sometimes the attachment patterns I learned from childhood reappear. Sometimes I doubt if I’m different at all from the person I used to be.

And yet: I’ve changed so much in the past few years. I know I’m more patient and open, that I practice equanimity more consistently than I once did. And yet I mess up all the time. It’s hard to endure the regressions when you know how much progress you’ve made. Like: am I just going to keep fucking up forever? But then I remember that life is just messing up over and over again. The one thing I know about practice is that practice never ends.

I know this feels Sisyphean to most people: _like, really? Continuous effort forever? When do I get to relax?_ Here’s how I try to think about it: if you stop viewing practice as a burden, it stops being one. If you subscribe to this Substack, I’m assuming that you’re sympathetic to a few different concepts: non-attachment, openness to experience, and getting closer to the person you want to be over a long period of time. In order to practice these concepts, you have to be okay with fucking up again and again. Honestly, you’ll probably fuck up regardless because that’s what people do, but the key is to forgive yourself for it—to believe that fucking up is just one more opportunity for practice.

People who think they’re perfect are rigid or narcissistic. People who think there’s no point in trying are nihilistic assholes. Most of us are somewhere in the middle—we know we’re getting better, but we’re not where we want to be. But that’s just life: _always being in the middle_.

The truth is, you _will_ get better. But you will probably never stop trying and you will never stop messing up. That might feel like a bitter pill, but when the alternatives are stagnation or resignation constant practice is the best path forward. If you can believe that being in the middle is what you need, it starts to feel like a gift.